The Project Gutenberg eBook of Greasy luck
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Greasy luck
        A whaling sketch book

Author: Gordon Grant

Release date: December 14, 2024 [eBook #74903]

Language: English

Original publication: Jamaica, NY: Caravan Maritime Books

Credits: Steve Mattern and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREASY LUCK ***


[Illustration]

[Illustration: _UNDER SAIL_

A Yankee whaling barque of the fifties]




                                GREASY
                                 LUCK

[Illustration: Sailor holding harpoon]

                         A WHALING SKETCH BOOK

                                  by
                             GORDON GRANT

                        WILLIAM FARQUHAR PAYSON
                               NEW YORK

                        CARAVAN MARITIME BOOKS
                           JAMAICA, NEW YORK
                                _1970_




                            COPYRIGHT, 1932
                        WILLIAM FARQUHAR PAYSON
                               NEW YORK


                        CARAVAN MARITIME BOOKS
                           JAMAICA, NEW YORK


                PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
               _by_ SENTRY PRESS, NEW YORK, N. Y. 10019




[Illustration: Sea gull]


                                  TO
                                MY WIFE
                          _a lover of ships_




[Illustration: Whale]


            The author gratefully acknowledges his debt to
                FRANK WOOD and WILLIAM H. TRIPP of the
               Whaling Museum of New Bedford, for their
                 splendid cooperation--and to CLIFFORD
                   W. ASHLEY and his most admirable
                      book “_The Yankee Whaler_”




                              _FOREWORD_


Turning the pages of Gordon Grant’s pictured story of whaling, it
suddenly struck me that the task of writing an introduction had certain
unusual features. Acting as a liaison officer between Captain Ahab of
the whaling ship _Pequod_ and the sheltered generation of 1932,
it is necessary to bear in mind that most members of this generation
are unaware that whaling is still an industry. They imagine it as
part of the closed book of New England maritime history. They regard
it romantically, and the ancient masthead shout, “Thar she blows!” is
familiar to the ladies and gentlemen who patronize the fast Atlantic
ferries. Whaling, in short, has become an antique interest, and
visitors to New Bedford may study the whole business in the collection
of the Old Dartmouth Historical Society.

The difference between this adventurous and romantic calling and the
modern whaleship is precisely the difference between pig-sticking as
practised by army officers in India and the stock-yards of Chicago
and Argentina. Making all allowance for the New Englander’s passion
for gain, there had to be some sporting instinct to send men out on
“lays” instead of wages, and to make them follow, year after year,
so dangerous a trade. It was only when another sporting chance came
along, the chance of the golden west, of striking further and further
beyond the ranges, that the New Englanders abandoned the whaling to
foreigners. The interest our antiquarians have in whaling is therefore
a sound one. It was a manifestation of the pioneer mentality; and when
that mentality was directed into other channels, whaling lost prestige
and became as prosaic as cod-fishing in modern times.

It might be mentioned here that the two instincts of civilized man--to
make a sport of his necessities, and then by quantity production
in factories to divorce all sport from his necessities--have been
spectacularly illustrated in the evolution of whaling from a sport
for heroes into a humdrum manifestation of big business. Efficiency
has never been so swiftly or so deplorably justified. At one end of
the scale we have Captain Ahab devoting all his life to the pursuit
of a mythological cetacean, the White Whale. At the other, in 1932,
we have British and Scandinavian whaling factories, twin screw,
oil-burning vessels of 14,000 tons, capable of pursuing whales of all
species in high speed motor whaleboats fitted with guns and bombs, with
air pumps which inflate the dead whale so that it will float until
needed. These ships have a specially designed stern slipway, up which
the entire carcase of a 100 ton whale can be hauled from the water to
the blubber deck. When the blubber has been removed the carcase is
sawn by machinery into sections and lowered to the meat deck. Nothing
of the animal is wasted. A packing factory on board cans and packs
the products ready for discharging at a convenient port into freight
steamers. Fuel-oil and water, which is distilled on board, supplies a
whole fleet of auxiliary whaling vessels.

Here we behold the modern commercial and mechanical genius at its peak.
It is so efficient that unless some legislative action is taken, whales
will become extinct. In two years these vessels have obtained more oil
and have killed more whales than the old American whalers took from the
sea in half a century.

It is true, as a recent author contends, that whaling is not properly
described as fishing. The whale is an animal, and his pursuit is a
form of hunting. In Gordon Grant’s drawings the whole art and craft
of catching whales is most lucidly and dramatically set forth. It is
sport because the hunters risked their lives when the harpoon left the
boatsteerer’s hands to plunge into the whale’s carcase. They were in
the most dire peril of a “stove” or a “chawed” boat until the animal’s
terrific struggles were ended by the thrust of a lance through his
vitals. In modern whaling the operatives are in no more danger than
the person who slits the jugular veins of the hogs suspended by their
hind legs on a moving chain in a Chicago abattoir. I doubt exceedingly
whether these modern whalers will ever have any songs or traditions.
All too soon they will, as I understand it, have no more whales. They
will have become history themselves without ever having become known
to the public. If by chance the captain of the _Vikingen_, of the
Viking Whaling Company, Limited, of London, ever meets Moby Dick, he
will order full speed ahead on his 4300 horsepower and overhaul the
White Whale in a few hours. A few days later he will be in sealed cans.

Ships, and especially sailing craft, are the unhappy victims of artists
who know more about pretty pictures than ships. They take quite
felonious liberties with the craft and the men they depict. In “Greasy
Luck” however, you will find the most austere fidelity to the truth
combined with what to me is a most satisfying vivacity of presentation.
I commend to your notice the lowered whaleboat on page 59 as an example
of what I mean. Such a boat was an instrument to which men entrusted
their lives and fortunes. It was the product of deep thought and
shrewd designing for a century. It was, as one writer says, “sharp and
clean-cut as a dolphin” with “a duck-like capacity to top the oncoming
waves, so that it will dryly ride where ordinary boats would fill....
Here we have a boat that two men may lift, and which will make ten
miles an hour in dead chase by the oars alone.” Such a craft has a
beauty of its own, not to be found in pleasure craft. The same boat is
shown at a dramatic moment of “A Nantucket Sleigh Ride” on page 75.

It appears to me that Mr. Grant has made a definitive and conclusive
contribution to Whaliana. If the whales go the way of the buffalo of
North America, we shall depend on this book for a lively conception of
the ancient sport. Ships and wild animals, it has been remarked, have
a hard and tragic ending. This book will preserve for posterity the
spiritual as well as the material glories of the whaler’s life.

[Illustration: William McFee’s signature]




                           _LIST OF PLATES_


  Under Sail                _Frontispiece_

  Fitting Out            _Facing Page_   2

  Hoisting Topsails                      4

  Choosing Boats’ Crews                  6

  A Harangue from the Captain            8

  Getting in the Mainsail               10

  Stowing the Outer Jib                 12

  A Typical Bow                         14

  A Typical Stern                       16

  The Deck                              18

  The Whaleboat                         20

  A Boat on the Cranes                  22

  Spare Boats                           24

  Harpoons                              26

  The Wheel                             28

  The Foc’s’le                          30

  The Windlass                          32

  The Galley                            34

  Types                                 36

  The Blacksmith                        38

  The Cooper                            40

  Grinding Spades                       42

  Coiling Line Tubs                     44

  Ten Dollars Reward                    46

  Grub                                  48

  Fresh Fish for the Cook to Spoil      50

  Whales                                52

  Whales                                54

  The Masthead                          56

  Lowering                              58

  A Race Under Sail                     60

  Waifing                               62

  “Going On”                            64

  “Give it to him!”                     66

  Sounding                              68

  A Breach                              70

  A “Chawed” Boat                       72

  “A Nantucket Sleigh Ride”             74

  Lancing                               76

  Towing to the Ship                    78

  Cutting-in Diagram                    80

  Removing the Lower Jaw                82

  The Junk                              84

  Cutting In                            86

  The Blanket Piece Coming Aboard       88

  Lowering into the Hold                90

  Mincing                               92

  Trying Out                            94

  Bailing the Case                      96

  Cleaning Ship                         98

  Main Hatch Surgery                   100

  Boat Surgery                         102

  Ashore for Water                     104

  Having it Out                        106

  Recruiting on the Beach              108

  A “Gam”                              110

  Song and Dance                       112

  Bumboats                             114

  Arctic Whaling                       116

  Whalebone                            118

  Cleaning Whalebone                   120

  Dead Man’s Chest                     122

  Homeward Bound                       124

  “Scrimshaw”                          126




                              _SKETCHES_


_FITTING OUT_

The last few days prior to a ship’s departure on a whaling voyage
witnessed great activity along the wharves of all whaling ports: New
Bedford, Fairhaven, Nantucket, Sag Harbor, Salem, and New London, to
note but a few in New England; in Dundee, Scotland, and Bergen in
Norway.

With the prospect of a voyage lasting perhaps three years, no item of
gear for the ship or provision for the crew was overlooked.

On sailing day, with everything checked off and stowed below, the crew
came aboard, the owners, their wives, and the townspeople crowded the
wharf to cheer them on their way and wish them “Greasy Luck.”

[Illustration]




_HOISTING TOPSAILS_

The work of the merchant ship sailor had but one object; to take the
ship by the shortest route from port to port. The whaleman, on the
other hand, in addition to his seamanship, was expert in the highly
technical work of killing whales.

While the whaling skippers lacked the smartness of the clipper captains
they were able, keen, and resourceful in emergencies that the merchant
ship masters seldom, if ever, were called upon to face.

[Illustration]




_CHOOSING BOATS’ CREWS_

Soon after the ship was on her course the crew was mustered and divided
into two watches--starboard and larboard--(the word “port” was not used
in whaleships). This done, the boats’ crews were chosen, consisting
of an officer, harpooneer, and four men. The mates in turn took their
pick of the men for their respective boats, subjected their choice to
questions regarding former ships and experience, and an inspection of
hands, feet, and muscular development--much like farmers at a cattle
show.

The harpooneers were called “boatsteerers,” which, to the landsman, is
somewhat misleading.

The mate steered the boat until the harpooneer struck the whale. They
thereupon changed places and the latter became “boatsteerer.”

The boatsteerers ranked next to the officers,--were quartered aft, and
had a separate mess.

[Illustration]




_A HARANGUE FROM THE CAPTAIN_

The watches and boats’ crews chosen, the captain called for attention
and delivered himself of a speech. The gist of his message did not vary
much from that of all other whaling skippers and his delivery was more
or less colourful according to his ability as an orator.

Running his eye from man to man, so that none escaped the implied
meaning behind the glance, he would voice his thoughts substantially as
follows:--“This ship is a whaler and we’re out to kill whales. I tell
you that now in case you might think you’re aboard a yacht and came
along for a picnic. I’m captain and these are my officers, and when an
order is given I want to see some jumping. I don’t want any loafers or
grumblers. Loafers and grumblers only make trouble for themselves, and
if any of you want trouble I’ll see that you damned well get it. You’ll
get good food and all you need--so I don’t want to hear any growling
about that. I won’t have any fighting or swearing. The sooner you fill
the ship the sooner you’ll get home:--and remember; there’s only one
captain aboard here and that’s me. If anyone wants to dispute that I’ll
damned soon show him. That’ll do----”

[Illustration]




_GETTING IN THE MAINSAIL_

To the watch, bending over the yard with nought between them and
oblivion but a slender foot rope, this was no easy task even in a
moderate wind. In a gale, with wet or frozen sails, the stowing of this
huge expanse of thrashing canvas can be better imagined than described.

[Illustration]




_STOWING THE OUTER JIB_

[Illustration]




_A TYPICAL BOW_

Here we have the bows of the barque “California” of New Bedford, built
in the early eighteen forties.

Square-rigged whaling craft varied in size from two hundred and fifty
to four hundred tons, seldom exceeding the latter figure.

Many were painted “frigate fashion” with black ports along the side--a
relic of the days when merchant ships used this device to deceive
pirates into the belief that they were heavily armed.

The whaler had a beauty peculiarly her own. She was rather a tubby
little thing, but with much grace notwithstanding. She was held in
supreme contempt by the officers and crews of her contemporaneous
big sisters the flash clippers, who referred to her as “spouter” and
“butcher shop.”

[Illustration]




_A TYPICAL STERN_

Unlike merchant ships, whalers had to keep their forward deck clear so
that all space could be devoted to the “cutting in” and “trying out” of
blubber.

The forward deck-house, characteristic of cargo carriers, which
contained the gallery and crew’s quarters, was moved far aft--half
to starboard--half to larboard--with a deck overhead from which the
quarter-boats were lowered.

The stern shown is that of “Lagoda,” a half size model of which has
been installed in the Whaling Museum in New Bedford.

[Illustration]




_THE DECK_

This diagram shows the deck arrangement of “Lagoda” of New Bedford and
was characteristic of all square-rigged whalers.

 A--B--C--D--E--Boats hanging on the davits. Many ships did not swing a
                boat in the position of “B.”

In their order the boats were named as follows:--“Bow”--“Starboard
Bow”--“Waist”--“Larboard”--“Starboard.” The latter was known as the
captain’s boat, though in later years the captain did not leave the
ship.

The first mate had the larboard boat--second mate the waist--third mate
the bow.

The senior boatsteerer took the starboard bow boat unless the ship
carried a fourth mate.

 F--Spare boats on the skids--or boat bridge.

 G--The main hatch.

 H--The try works.

 J--The steering wheel.--To left of the wheel, the companion stairs to
    captain’s quarters.

 K--The galley.

 L--The “cutting-in” stage. At this point a section of the bulwarks was
    removed during cutting in.

 M--The foc’s’le hatch leading to crew’s quarters below.

 N--The windlass.

[Illustration]




_The Whaleboat_

Boats varied from 28 to 30 feet in length, with a beam of 5-1/2 to 6
feet.

 A--Bow showing the “chocks,” a channel in the stem through which the
    whale line ran. This was fitted with a bronze roller--or lined with
    sheet lead.

Through a hole across the chocks a slender spindle of wood was
inserted--to be easily broken should necessity arise.

This “chock pin” kept the line from jumping out of its groove,--and
was, moreover, when worn in the buttonhole ashore, the badge of the
whaleman who had killed his whale.

 B--Main line tub--containing 225 fathoms of whale line.

 C--Reserve tub--holding from 75 to 125 fathoms.

 D--Loggerhead--a heavy snubbing post around which the whale line ran
    from the tub and thence forward to the bow.

 E--Mast step.

 F--Padded notch in the edge of the forward box into which the
    harpooneer braced his thigh when darting his irons.

 L--Centreboard.

Except when under sail the boat was propelled by five oars, and
in order to balance the power from this unequal number, oars of
different lengths were used.

 G--Harpoon oar          16 feet long

 H--Bow oar              17   “   “

 I--Midship oar          18   “   “

 J--Tub oar              17   “   “

 K--After or stroke oar  16   “   “

Except when under sail the boat was steered by means of an oar over
twenty feet long.

The complete equipment of a boat included paddles, harpoons, lances,
spades, mast and sail, water and bread kegs, lantern, flares and
waifs, and other small gear.

[Illustration]




_A BOAT ON THE CRANES_

The whaleboat was so lightly constructed that had it been allowed
to hang by the hoisting tackle or “falls,” there was danger of it
“hogging” or breaking its back.

To obviate this “supporters” were provided to sustain part of the
weight. These “cranes” were hinged and were swung in when the boats
were lowered.

After a boat was hoisted, the tubs were removed in order to further
lighten her.

The tubs were kept on a rack abreast of the boat, inboard, and the
preparatory order before lowering was “Get your tubs aboard.”

[Illustration]




_SPARE BOATS_

Two spare boats were carried thus on the skids, and were brought into
use when one or more of the others were “stove” or destroyed.

Under these spares were racks on which cutting spades and such gear
were stowed.

This view is looking forward from the deck over the wheel.

[Illustration]




_HARPOONS_

The purpose of the harpoon was not to kill the whale but to be a means
of “getting fast” with the whale line.

The killing was done with the lance--a long shanked instrument with a
small razor-sharp tip.

From earliest times the whaleman had endeavoured to fashion a harpoon
that would not “draw” or pull out. Many variations had been tried
of the solid head type of “iron,” but they all gave way before the
“toggle” iron, invented by a Negro named Lewis Temple in 1848.

The sketch shows only the principal types--and the large variety of
bombs and bomb guns has been omitted; they savour too much of modern
methods and wholesale slaughter.

 A--Two flued iron.

 B--Single flued iron.

 C--Temple’s toggle iron.

 D--Modern toggle iron.

In the toggles a wooden match-like pin was inserted through the head of
the harpoon to hold it straight. This broke as soon as pull was exerted
on the line and the head turned as shown in fig. E.

 F--An effective darting gun used against Right and Bowhead whales. A
    short gun barrel was mounted on the end of the pole. On one side of
    this was inserted a harpoon attached to the line. Reaching half way
    to the point was a rod, which on coming in contact with the skin of
    the whale, exploded the charge in the chamber and discharged a bomb.
    The whole instrument was thrown in the same manner as a harpoon, the
    gun-pole being retrieved by a line attached to the boat, the iron
    remaining in the whale.

Except in the case of lone bulls, guns were of no use among sperm
whales; the discharge scared the herd--or as the whaleman said,
“gallied the pod.”

 G--An English double flued iron with “stop withers.”

 H--The Greener gun--used by Dundee whalers in the Arctic.

 J--The harpoon--with slot and travelling ring--fired from the Greener
  gun.

[Illustration]




_THE WHEEL_

This type of steering wheel known as “shin cracker” was peculiar to the
Yankee whaleships. The wheel was mounted on the tiller and the helm was
moved by means of tackle which ran around the drum, through sheaves and
blocks to the bulwarks. Consequently, when the steersman turned the
wheel he walked back and forward with it across the deck.

In the deck over him there was a small hatch through which he could
watch the sails.

[Illustration]




_THE FOC’S’LE_

The foc’s’le was reached by a hatch, forward of the mainmast, which
also served as the only inlet for daylight and fresh air.

In some cases the ceiling was so low that any man above average height
could not stand upright. In heavy weather the deck was never dry, due
to leaky hawse pipes and dripping oilskins, and in the tropics it was a
furnace. Altogether, the combined odours of unwashed bodies, unwashed
clothes, bilge water, tobacco and oil lanterns, made it a noisome
habitation.

The men’s bunks were ranged in a double tier along the sides and their
sea chests, lashed to the deck, served as benches.

[Illustration]




_THE WINDLASS_

This ancient contrivance known as a log windlass was only a slight
improvement over its predecessor in which the barrel was laboriously
turned by wooden bars or “handspikes” inserted in holes.

In the one shown a ratchet mechanism was added, and when weighing
anchor or cutting in a whale, four or five men on each side pumped the
brake handles up and down.

One has but to compare this heartbreaking relic to the modern steam or
electric winch to appreciate the truth of the captain’s allusion to a
yachting cruise.

[Illustration]




_THE GALLEY_

Here the cook, or “doctor” as he was called, prepared the food for
officers and crew. The galley was located aft on the starboard side,
abreast of the wheel, where the steersman might get an occasional cup
of coffee from the cook to ease his trick at the wheel.

How different to the case of the man at the wheel in merchant ships,
stamping his feet and blowing on his fingers in the roaring forties,
and looking with wistful eyes towards the galley at the far end of the
deck.

[Illustration]




_TYPES_

The crews of Yankee whalers up to, and including, the fifties were made
up mostly of Americans drawn from the neighbourhood of the ships’ home
port.

As the great West opened up, the movement overland diverted the native
American from the sea, and in the declining years of the industry crews
were composed mainly of Portuguese, Negroes, and Bravas from the Cape
Verde Islands.

Whaling crews were not paid wages but were given a “lay,” or share in
the profits at the end of the voyage.

The lay scale was graded down from 1/16th for the captain to 1/200th
for a green hand--and even less to the cabin boy.

At the end of a long voyage, when the ship was credited with oil valued
at $250,000, or more, the sailors’ share was quite worth while.

[Illustration]




_THE BLACKSMITH_

The blacksmith’s duties lay in the care of all the harpoons, spades,
lances, boarding and mincing knives, and kindred gear.

When whales were being killed and brought alongside he was a busy man,
straightening and repairing irons, and keeping the cutting-in stage
supplied with keen-edged spades.

[Illustration]




_THE COOPER_

When a whaleship set out on a voyage she was loaded from keel to deck
with casks of various sizes, from the largest, of fourteen barrel
capacity, to long, narrow ones, known as “ryers,” used to fill empty
spaces and odd corners. Many of them were filled with fresh water to
serve as ballast, and all the spare sails, food, clothing (slops) and
other reserve articles were headed up in casks.

In due course they were emptied and filled with oil, and the cooper’s
task was to keep them in good condition, and, if need arose, to
construct new ones from the staves, heads and hoops which he had in
reserve.

The term “barrel” was only used as a unit of measure:--a cask was
spoken of as an eight barrel cask or a whale’s size was reckoned in so
many barrels.

An average whaler carried in the neighbourhood of five hundred casks of
all sizes, and the keeping of them in serviceable condition involved
constant watchfulness and work on the cooper’s part.

[Illustration]




_GRINDING SPADES_

No one was busier than the ship’s boy. Helping the steward in the
pantry, turning the grindstone, peeling potatoes for the cook, or
running aloft to tie stops in the buntlines, he was kept hopping from
one job to another.

He doubtless found ere long that whaling was not as romantic a pursuit
as he had dreamed it to be, and cried himself to sleep in homesickness
many times before the end of the voyage.

[Illustration]




_COILING LINE TUBS_

The coiling of the whale line in the boats’ tubs was a matter demanding
extreme care, as not only did the catching of whales depend on the
line, but improper coiling might produce sudden kinks and fouling, to
result in the maiming or killing of one or more of the crew, or even
the loss of the boat itself.

Whale line was made of “long manila fibre” and was three quarters of an
inch in diameter. Even when new it was as pliable as an old shoe lace
and capable of sustaining a weight of three tons.

In coiling, the line was laid out on deck, the end passed through a
snatch block on the mainstay over head, and thence down to the tub. The
end, with its eye splice, was left hanging over the edge of the tub
where it could be bent onto the second tub should necessity arise.

The line was coiled clockwise to the centre, thence to the side, and
the process repeated until the tub was full.

This was known as a “flake” or “Flemish coil.”

Each boatsteerer attended to the coiling of his own tubs, a helper
meanwhile twisted the line to the left as he pulled it down through the
block.

[Illustration]




_TEN DOLLARS REWARD_

In some ships, when whales were scarce, and weeks--even months--elapsed
without a kill it was the custom for the captain to have a five or ten
dollar gold piece nailed to the mainmast to be claimed by the first man
who sighted a “blow.”

[Illustration]




_GRUB_

“What’s this--the cook’s pocketbook?”

Jack always ate his meals on deck except in inclement weather. Salt
beef or pork, cooked in a sadly unvarying fashion, was served in small
wooden tubs called “kids,” and the sailor’s treasured privilege,
no matter what the quality of the fare might be, was to make
uncomplimentary remarks about the cook and all his ancestors.

[Illustration]




“_FRESH FISH FOR THE COOK TO SPOIL_”

In the warmer latitudes there were always fish playing about the ship’s
bows: bonita, barracouta, dolphins and porpoises----

To vary the weary round of salt “horse” it was no trick at all for one
of the boatsteerers to take himself into the martingale stays and bring
up a fish that would arouse the envy of any landlubber angler.

[Illustration]




_WHALES_

 1--SPERM WHALE. This whale was long avoided by the early whalemen
    before means were perfected to meet his wary and pugnacious
    character.

    A large sperm whale would measure sixty-five feet and give eighty
    barrels of oil. Many larger ones have been taken but the average
    gave forty-five barrels.

    Its natural food is the giant squid, which it finds at profound
    depths--a half mile or more.

    Sperm whales are usually found in herds or “pods,” except in the
    case of occasional “lone bulls.”

 2--RIGHT WHALE. This is the whale of the early history of the
    industry--docile and easy to take--whose only means of defence lay
    in its great tail or “flukes.” This and the Bowhead were known as
    “Baleen” or whalebone whales.

    They feed on the surface--their food being small crustacea or
    “brit,” which they scoop up with open mouth and strain through
    the rows of baleen which hang from the upper jaw.

 3--BOWHEAD WHALE. The Arctic or Greenland whale. Living in the cold
    waters of the high latitudes the blubber of this species is much
    thicker than that of Sperm or Right, one Bowhead rendering as much
    as three hundred barrels.

    The quality of its oil, however, is much inferior to sperm oil, and
    for years it was hunted for its whalebone alone.

[Illustration]




_WHALES_

 4--FINBACK WHALE. This and the Sulphurbottom are much longer than the
    Sperm, Right, and Bowhead--but were ignored because of the fact that
    they sank when killed, and because of their rapidity of movement,
    claimed by some to be as much as fifty miles an hour.

    Modern whalers have met these difficulties by employing fast motor
    boats and by inflating the dead whale with compressed air.

 5--SULPHURBOTTOM--or BLUE WHALE. The longest of the whale family. Some
    specimens have been taken exceeding one hundred feet in length.

 6--HUMPBACK WHALE. This whale is one of the “bone” species, but its
    baleen was too short to be of commercial value.

    It sank when killed, but as it was almost always found in shoal
    water gases due to decomposition brought it to the surface in a
    short time.

[Illustration]




_THE MASTHEAD_

From the day of sailing until the home port was reached at the end of a
long voyage, lookouts were always kept at the fore and mainmastheads.

Even with his ship “full to the eyebrows” the whaling skipper could not
resist the taking of one more whale, until every possible container,
large and small, was full to running over.

The call of the lookout was a sort of wail, running through a scale of
five or six notes, each man putting in his own curlicues according to
the quality of his voice.

He would sustain the call as long as the blow lasted:

“A blow!--A blo-o-o-o-ow! A blow. A blow!!”

“Where away?” from the skipper.

“Two miles--weather beam--Blo-o-o-ow! Blo-o-o-o-! There she breaches--A
blo-o-o-ow! A blow!--A blow!”

[Illustration]




_LOWERING_

The boats were kept ready for instant lowering. The tubs were first
put aboard and a man took his station at each of the “falls” or davit
tackles, one man remaining in the boat to fend her off the side of the
ship.

“Lower away!”

Down went the boats, the crew following the best way they could,
sliding down the falls or scrambling down the side. The hooks were cast
off, mast stepped, sail hoisted, and the race for the whale began.

[Illustration]




_A RACE UNDER SAIL_

When the wind was favourable the approach was made under sail.

Various rigs were used: lug, spritsail, and sometimes a jib was set,
all designed, however, for quick manipulation.

When sailing, the boat was steered by a rudder; at all other times by
the long steering oar.

Meantime the harpooneer was busy with the whale line, running it from
the tub, round the loggerhead and forward to the chocks, coiling the
“box warp” and attaching his two irons.

[Illustration]




_WAIFING_

When a heavy swell was running it was often impossible for the men in
the boats to see the whale, so the lookout at the masthead signalled
the direction by means of a flag or “waif.”

[Illustration]




“_GOING ON_”

The angle of vision of the whale was very limited, so the approach was
made, if possible, from the right rear, except in the case of a left
handed boatsteerer.

On nearing the quarry oars were sometimes replaced by paddles. At the
right moment the officer made a sign to the boatsteerer to stand by.

The latter unshipped his oar and looked to his harpoons to see that all
was clear.

A second iron was attached by a “short warp” on a running bowline to
the whale line, and lay handy, alongside number one.

The boatsteerer did not lift his harpoon and stand poised in readiness.
In the excitement attending the crucial moment, he might succumb to
buck-fever and be unable to let go.

Instead--he flexed his fingers or rubbed his hands up and down his
legs, his eye on the whale, waiting for the command.

[Illustration]




“_GIVE IT TO HIM!_”

Like a flash he grasped his iron, and with every ounce of his strength
darted it “up to the hitches.”

Then the second iron if possible.

If the second could not be used, it was at once thrown overboard, out
of the way, to be retrieved later.

[Illustration]




_SOUNDING_

The instant command was “Stern all!!”--and the boat was backed out of
range of the great flaying tail.

Many things might happen in the next few moments.

The whale might “run”--he might turn and attack the boat with open
jaws, or “sound.”

The boatsteerer and the officer exchanged places.

The line ran out at such speed that water had to be thrown into the tub
to prevent the line setting fire to the loggerhead.

[Illustration]




_A BREACH_

Should the whale sound, he would stay down an hour or longer, taking
out at times all the line of one or more boats.

If he took all from one and no neighbouring boat was handy to supply
more, a wooden contrivance for retarding his speed called a “drug” was
made fast to the end of the line and cast loose.

The men peaked their oars, waiting for the whale to reappear.

His reappearance was not a modest drifting to the surface. He was
thoroughly enraged, and he came up in a manner dramatic and picturesque.

Suddenly, with the speed of an express train, he rose from the bottom,
often making a clean leap out of the water and coming down with a
mighty splash.

Lucky the boat’s crew that was not caught underneath.

[Illustration]




_A “CHAWED” BOAT_

A fighting bull sperm would often turn and attack the boat, and only
the skill of the boatsteerer kept it out of range of the snapping jaws
and thrashing flukes.

Boats have been destroyed at one mouthful, and those of the crew as
were unable to leap clear. Such was the rage of some whales that they
returned again and again to the broken fragments until they were
reduced to matchwood.

[Illustration]




“_A NANTUCKET SLEIGH RIDE_”

Should the whale run the crew unshipped their oars and faced forward, a
turn of the line was made round the loggerhead, and “playing the fish”
began. The boat’s tub and loggerhead were the equivalent of the reel
on the trout fisherman’s rod, and the same tactics were employed as in
trout fishing, except that the boat followed the whale at a speed of
fifteen or more knots an hour.

The boatsteerer snubbed the line by the loggerhead and the crew at each
indication of slackening of speed hauled in. Shorter and shorter the
line grew as the whale tired, and closer to his flank drew the boat’s
bow, where the mate stood ready to exercise his time honoured privilege
of delivering the final thrust.

A Nantucket sleigh ride, as it was called, often took the boat miles
beyond the horizon, and the crew were often obliged to wait many hours,
even days, to be picked up by the ship,--indeed in cases of storm or
fog there are tragic instances of boats never having been found.

[Illustration]




_LANCING_

To kill the whale at a single thrust required the greatest skill, and
the boat to be laid on at the right spot.

The mate, awaiting the moment when he could reach the “life,” made
repeated thrusts with his lance in order to weaken the victim.

The success of the final stroke was proclaimed by “spouting red”--and
the dying whale went into a “flurry,” which consisted of swimming round
in a gradually diminishing circle until with a final thrashing of his
giant flukes he rolled over on his side “fin out.”

[Illustration]




_TOWING TO THE SHIP_

If more whales were in the vicinity, the dead one was “waifed” with a
small red flag and the pursuit resumed.

A whale usually ran to windward--leaving the ship far to leeward,
shorthanded, and faced with a long beat to pick up her boats.

A line was made fast by a hole cut in the flukes, the boats were
connected, and all hands put their backs into the arduous task of
towing back to the ship.

[Illustration]




_CUTTING-IN DIAGRAM_

 A--Jaw of the Sperm whale

 B--Case

 C--Junk

 D--White Horse

 E--Blanket or blubber, which was stripped from the carcass in a spiral
    fashion. The blubber hook was inserted in a hole, _f_, for the
    first cut.

 G--H--Head and lips of the Bowhead. The latter were very rich in oil.

The same method of stripping was employed in all species of whales.

[Illustration]




_REMOVING THE LOWER JAW OF A SPERM WHALE_

Cutting in was always done on the starboard side of the ship, and if
possible, to windward, so that wind pressure on the sails tended to
lift the side of the vessel and sustain the great weight of blubber
coming aboard.

The sketch shows the cutting stage rigged out, the huge tackle made
fast to the jaw, and the mates on the stage disjointing it with their
spades.

The jaw had no commercial value whatever. When a particularly large one
was taken, stripped, and dried, it made a picturesque gateway for the
captain’s garden at home, and the great teeth were used by the crew for
their “scrimshaw” work.

[Illustration]




_THE JUNK_

The jaw having been removed, the junk was then taken off and brought on
deck to be cut up and tried out.

The junk was very rich in spermaceti--used by the manufacturers of
cosmetics and spermaceti candles.

While the whale lay alongside, the neighbouring waters were infested
with a multitude of voracious sharks, which, if the cutting in were not
done without delay tore the blubber to shreds.

During cutting in the men on the stage made periodical onslaughts on
these robbers with their spades, taking a characteristically seamanlike
satisfaction in seeing the wounded sharks instantly set upon and
devoured by their fellows.

[Illustration]




_CUTTING IN_

The captain with the first and second mate, usually was on the stage,
taking an active part in cutting in.

The windlass crew were forward, heaving on the tackle which was
suspended from the cap of the lower mainmast.

As they hove the blanket rose higher and higher, the cutters plied
their spades, and the whale rolled over and over.

[Illustration]




_THE BLANKET PIECE COMING ABOARD_

When the tackle was “block and block,” the third mate or one of the
boatsteerers, with his “boarding knife,” made a hole for the second
tackle.

A heavy blubber hook, or the eye in the long strop of the block in the
foreground was pushed through and secured on the outside by a heavy
wooden pin or toggle.

The second tackle was hove taut to take up the weight and the upper
piece sliced off.

[Illustration]




_LOWERING INTO THE HOLD_

As each piece was cut off, it was lowered down the main hatch into the
blubber room and there cut into “horse pieces,” three or four feet long
and six or eight inches wide.

[Illustration]




_MINCING_

The horse pieces were tossed back on deck, where they were placed on a
long plank set on tubs and “minced” into “books” or “bible pieces” with
large two-handled knives.

The term “books” arose from the fact that the blubber was not cut quite
through, and a minced piece bore a rough resemblance to the leaves of a
book.

[Illustration]




_TRYING OUT_

Day and night the try works were kept going, until all the blubber had
been rendered.

Dense black smoke by day, and illuminated sails and rigging at night
disclosed to passing ships the proximity of a whaler. Merchant sailors
claimed they could smell a “spouter” over the horizon.

The furnace contained two large iron kettles similar to that in the
foreground of the sketch. Beneath each of these was a separate fire
grate, and under all--a shallow pan of water as safeguard.

The minced blubber was tried out in these kettles, and when the book
pieces had given up their oil they were used as fuel. Enough of this
“crackling” was kept to start the fires for the next whale.

As the oil filled the kettles, it was bailed off into a copper cooling
tank--then to casks on deck where it cooled thoroughly for a day or two
before being stowed away in the hold.

[Illustration]




_BAILING THE CASE_

If the whale was small, the case was hoisted on deck where it was laid
open and the liquid spermaceti saved with scoops and dippers,--but if
it was too heavy for this it was secured to the side of the ship, nose
end down. A hole was cut into the reservoir and a “case bucket” rigged
from the mainyard and manipulated by four men,--one to handle the
bucket, two on the guy lines to force it down by means of the pole, and
the fourth to hoist and lower.

This oil often amounted to as much as thirty barrels of liquid
spermaceti, which had only to be headed up without further treatment.

To this day there has been found no equal to this oil for the
lubricating of watches and fine machinery.

[Illustration]




_CLEANING SHIP_

By the time the oil was tried out and the stripped carcass cast adrift
to make a royal feast for sharks and seabirds, the ship was a slithery
mass of oil, gurry, and blood,--to which was added the effects of
clouds of smut and black smoke from the try works.

All hands turned to clean ship. Ashes from the fires were sprinkled on
the deck and bulwarks, and brooms and scrubbers were plied until she
gleamed again,--except aloft, where the sails hung black and an affront
to the eyes of clippermen. When the kettles had been scrubbed inside
until they shone like silver punchbowls, the men turned their attention
to themselves and their clothes.

To be clean again! How good it felt:--ship, gear, and man.

But how often was it no sooner achieved than a yell from the masthead
announced

                        “She blows! She blows!”

and all the weary business had to be gone through with again.

[Illustration]




_MAIN HATCH SURGERY_

Some English and Scottish whalers carried surgeons, but it was not the
custom in Yankee ships. Whatever casualties befell his men, the captain
attended to as best he could.

Heroic tales are related of bone settings and amputations without
anesthetics aboard whaleships that pay high tribute to the fortitude of
that vanished race of hardy seamen.

[Illustration]




_BOAT SURGERY_

While the captain repaired his men--“Chips” repaired his boats.

Ships’ carpenters received their training as boat builders, and were
prepared, not only to mend them, but had “knocked down” parts stowed
below for the construction of new ones.

Whaleboats were very lightly built and subjected to extremely rough
handling. Seldom did a whaleship start a voyage with anything but new
craft on her davits.

[Illustration]




_ASHORE FOR WATER_

As the casks were filled with oil, the fresh water supply diminished,
so shore parties were sent off with empty casks to be filled and towed
back to the ship.

[Illustration]




_HAVING IT OUT_

Fighting aboard ship was not tolerated by the captain, and grudges were
carefully nursed until some shore duty afforded the belligerents an
opportunity to settle their affair on the beach.

[Illustration]




_RECRUITING ON THE BEACH_

Disillusioned by hard work, indifferent food, and miserable conditions
of living in general, men were constantly deserting the whaleships,
especially in the South Seas--where the islands presented a seemingly
idyllic existence to the hard driven sailor man.

Whaling captains did their best to repair these losses by recruiting
among the beachcombers and deserters from other ships, but the
inducements held out were no different to those with which they were
only too well acquainted, and met with little success, except in cases
where idleness and monotony gave way to a desire to get home again.

Many of these runaways, however, were so steeped in the soft living in
the islands that they deserted again at the first opportunity.

[Illustration]




_A “GAM”_

The tedium of a protracted whale hunt and association with the same
companions for months on end was relieved when two ships met at sea. If
they hailed from the same port so much the better.

The sails were laid aback, and the captains, mates, and crews exchanged
visits. Old friends met, and letters passed--along with newspapers and
home gossip. Work ceased--the cook threw a few more raisins in the plum
duff--and a general holiday was declared.

A gam might last a day or a week, and if whales appeared there was
friendly competition between the boats of one ship and the other, the
oil taken during this period of “mating” being shared equally.

[Illustration]




_SONG AND DANCE_

With a Negro or two in the crew, the foc’s’le could always be assured
of entertainment in the dog watches or during a gam.

[Illustration]




_BUMBOATS_

When ships touched at ports in the Cape Verde Islands, the Azores, or
other such rendezvous they were surrounded by peddlers of fresh fruit
and vegetables, a very welcome variant after months of salt junk and
hardtack.

[Illustration]




_ARCTIC WHALING_

Compared to the dramatic action of Sperm whaling, the taking of Right
whales was a tame business, but the chase of Bowhead or Arctic whales
took men among icebergs and floes where their work was complicated by
discomfort and the danger of ships being crushed or wrecked.

Many individual whalers have been thus lost, and in 1871 a fleet of
thirty-four was crushed and abandoned in the Arctic ice.

[Illustration]




_WHALEBONE_

Whalebone, which once brought a higher price than the oil of the bone
whales, has little or no commercial value now.

The sketch shows the upper part of the head of a Bowhead whale, with
the whalebone attached.

In larger specimens the slabs of “bone” reached twelve feet or more in
length.

[Illustration]




_CLEANING WHALEBONE_

The “slabs” were cut from the jaw, and after being scraped and washed
were tied in bundles.

[Illustration]




_DEAD MAN’S CHEST_

When a man died or deserted, unless the captain chose to take his
effects back to his family, they were auctioned off to the highest
bidder.

As often as not the chest was worth more than the contents.

[Illustration]




_HOMEWARD BOUND_

Instead of sailing for home when the ship was full, many whalers
discharged their oil at the Hawaiian Islands or San Francisco and set
out for more.

This oil was put aboard large cargo ships capable of carrying the catch
of several whalers, and taken round the Horn to New York, Boston, or
the whaleships’ home port.

But at last the “spouter” was filled up and ready for the long passage
home, the captain served grog, and all hands were hailed aft to “splice
the main brace.”

[Illustration]




“_SCRIMSHAW_”

With a four or five months’ passage home before him, the whaleman
occupied himself by carving and fashioning all manner of articles
out of bone and whales’ teeth;--scrimshaw work. He had usually some
particular person in mind as he scraped and sawed, filed and drilled,
often with tools made from nails or odd bits of metal.--Model ships
or boats, knives, forks, combs, ladles, yarn winders, bodkins, and a
thousand other nick-nacks were turned out.

The favourite article however was the “jagging wheel,”--a contrivance
for decorating pie crust and pastry, and many were the variations on
the handles of these jaggers.

The visitor inspecting the fine collection of these what Herman
Melville calls “Skrimshandered” articles, in the Nantucket and New
Bedford Whaling Museums, cannot help being struck with the exquisite
workmanship of most of the specimens and the high degree of artistry
attained in the decoration of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The whaleman and his trim little ships have gone on the long passage,
but if in nothing else, he has left in this a delightful and worthy
record behind him.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: End paper depicting whaling]




Transcriber’s Notes

Perceived typographical errors have been silently corrected.

Archaic and unusual spelling has been retained as in the original.





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREASY LUCK ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


